HDDS-15323. Add storage capacity planning administrator guide. (#436)
apache/ozone-site: docs/05-administrator-guide/02-configuration/04-performance/11-storage-capacity-planning.md

For background on Datanode volumes and related settings, see [Datanodes](../../../core-concepts/architecture/datanodes). Full property descriptions are in the [configuration appendix](../appendix).

## When is a Disk Considered "Full"?

A disk (or "Volume" in Ozone terminology) is considered **Full** for new data allocations and replication targets when the available physical space falls below a specific threshold.

This threshold is the sum of two "Reserved Space" configurations plus a safety buffer for the operation itself:

`Failure Threshold = (Volume Min Free Space) + (DU Reserved Space) + (Operation Buffer)`

If a volume's free space is less than this threshold, SCM will stop selecting this volume for new containers or as a destination for re-replication (including decommission and maintenance moves).

## Reserved Space Concepts

Ozone provides two types of reserved space to protect the system:

### 1. Volume Min Free Space

This is a safety margin managed by the Datanode to prevent the disk from ever reaching 100% capacity. It is the most important setting for capacity planning.

- **Purpose**: Protects the Datanode from OS-level disk-full errors.
- **Configuration**:

>   - `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space`: A fixed value (e.g., `20GB`).

Reviewer: @jojochuang Should we also mention about volume min free space hard limit?

**- Soft limit (min.free.space.percent, default 2%):** used for what is reported to SCM in heartbeats as freeSpaceToSpare. This governs SCM placement decisions.
**- Hard limit (min.free.space.hard.limit.percent, default 1.5%):** used for local write rejection on the Datanode.

Author: Ah yes. I missed these recent additions.

This reserves space for non-Ozone files on the same disk (e.g., OS logs, system tools, or other services).

- **Purpose**: Prevents Ozone from consuming space that is intended for other uses on the host.
- **Configuration**:
  - `hdds.datanode.dir.du.reserved`: Fixed bytes per volume (e.g., `/data1:500MB`).
  - `hdds.datanode.dir.du.reserved.percent`: Percentage per volume (default is `0.0001` or 0.01%).

### 3. Operation Buffer (2x Container Size)

When Ozone replicates a container (e.g., during decommissioning), it requires space to hold the incoming data in a temporary directory before importing it.

- **Requirement**: Ozone requires free space equal to **2x the Container Size**.
- **Example**: For a default 5 GB container, this is **10 GB**.

## Configuration Parameters

| Property | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space` | `20GB` | Fixed minimum free space per volume. |
| `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent` | `0.02` (2%) | Percentage-based minimum free space. |
| `hdds.datanode.dir.du.reserved` | (unset) | Fixed bytes reserved for non-Ozone use. |
| `ozone.scm.container.size` | `5GB` | The target size for containers. |

> | `hdds.datanode.storage.utilization.critical.threshold` | `0.95` (95%) | Threshold at which SCM logs a "Critical" space warning. |

Reviewer: We also mention about warning utilisation threshold :

```
  <property>
    <name>hdds.datanode.storage.utilization.warning.threshold</name>
    <value>0.75</value>
    <tag>OZONE, SCM, MANAGEMENT</tag>
    <description>
      If a datanode overall storage utilization exceeds more than this
      value, a warning will be logged while processing the nodeReport in SCM.
    </description>
  </property>
```

## Inspecting Storage Usage

Administrators can inspect the actual and "SCM-usable" space using the Ozone CLI or the Recon Web UI.

### 1. Recon Web UI

The [Recon cluster capacity guide](../../operations/observability/recon/recon-capacity-distribution) describes how to monitor cluster-wide storage:

- **Dashboards**: View aggregated capacity, used space, and remaining space for the entire cluster.
- **Datanodes Page**: Sort Datanodes by utilization to quickly identify nodes that are approaching their "Full" threshold.

### 2. Node Usage Summary (CLI)

To see a high-level view of how much space is used across the cluster:

```bash
ozone admin datanode usageinfo
```

This command shows the capacity, SCM used, and remaining space for each Datanode.

### 3. Detailed Volume Info

> To see the status of individual disks on a specific Datanode:

Reviewer: This is a bit misleading as **datanode usageInfo** it does not give individual disks info on specific Datanode.
Rather it should be,

```suggestion
To see the aggregated capacity, usage, and remaining space for a specific Datanode:
```

```bash

> ozone admin datanode usageinfo --uuid <datanode-uuid>

Reviewer: uuid is deprecated.
```suggestion
ozone admin datanode usageinfo --node-id <datanode-uuid>
```
